# Consistency - Part 1

## Paper 1 - 2PC

* Distinction between presumed nothing, presumed abort and presumed commit is made.
* The objective of the paper is to ensure reduced logging as an optimization for recovery
* 2PC required a main memory database at the transaction coordinator to keep records of the currently executing 2PC transactions
* The rows corresponding to a particular transaction ID can be flushed if all of the cohorts for that transaction send an ACK to the coordinator
* The coordinator makes a commit stable before broadcasting COMMIT messages to the cohort.
* NPrC is the touted protocol in the paper, which either performs the same, or better than PrN, PrA and PrC.

## PrN
* Ideally for PrN, logging occurs twice
    * Just before sending the outcome to the cohort
    * Just after received the last expected ACK for a transaction. An END record is also logged to make sure the transaction's entry is `not' restored to the DB 
* This means than if the co-ordinator crashed before an outcome is decided, then the cohort that check with it later are asked to abort, as the transaction never made it to the protocol database.
* Each of the cohort writes 2 forced log messages, on PREPARE and COMMIT/ABORT, and it sends 2 messages to the coordinator, namely the COMMIT-VOTE/ABORT-VOTE, and the final ACK

## PrA
* If a transaction aborts, it's entry is deleted from the protocol database, since an abort entry and a non-entry mean the exact same thing.
* In summary, PrA commits transactions exactly the same way as PrN, but it aborts transactions more cheaply (i.e. by the above deletion)

## PrC
* It maintains an explicit copy of transactions that have been aborted.
* If a transaction completes, it's deleted from the protocal database.
* If a transaction queried isn't present in the database, it's presumed to have committed.
* A commmitted transaction's record shouldn't be re-inserted into the protocol database once the coordinator recovers from a crash.
* Coordinatory: 2 forced writes to the log are done by the coordinator
    * At the point the transaction is initiated
    * Once an outcome is decided, before sending the COMMIT message to the cohort
* Cohort: 1 forced PREPARE log record, and 1 COMMIT log record. 
* No final ACK is needed. Once the commit messages are sent out, it's assumed that the outcome was commit. If one among the cohort comes back online and sees only a PREPARE in it's logs, it'll query the coordinator, and if it finds that the transaction doesn't exist in the protocol database, it'll assume that the outcome was COMMIT, and proceed with committing it.

## NPrC
* Instead of full knowledge of active transactions (given by the log-write at the time of initiation), it uses an approximation of transactions that may have been active at the time of the crash.
* IN = transactions that may have initiated but did not commit.

## Observations
* PrA is advantageous over PrC because PrC force writes both its log records, whereas PrA forces only one.
* PrC has the obvious advantage with respect to messages, as it has fewer that need to be broadcast.
* What needs to be done is to optimize PrC such that it's logging overhead is significantly lowered.


## Class Discussion

Consistency controls the semantics of what value of a given data segment is valid to request.
Scenario of replicated data and the fact that there is a slight delay in consistency when the transaction is distributed to update the multiple sites.

Types of consistency:
* Strong
	* Used for financial transactions
* Eventual
	* Lazy replication involved
* Bounded
	* Returns data up to 't' seconds old
* Read-my-writes
	* In the same session, if a write has happened before the current operation, then read the value writted by that write
	* Else, fall back to eventual consistency
* Causal
	* If there is a causal relation between the value being read and a write operation written earlier in the session, return the version at least at the point of the causal write.
	* Else fall back to eventual, similar to read-my-writes
* Monotonic
	* Should return at least the latest read issued for the same value
	* If a previous read is not, found, then use the value written by a previous Put

Strong and eventual are at the opposite end of the spectrum

### Pileus

Infrastructure involves a client, primary site, and a list of secondary sites.
Timeline Consistency: A client requests a value, with a given timestamp, and the site it requests returns values with a timestamp after the timestamp specified
Pileus API requires value and timestamp as parameters
If a node doesn't contain the value of the value after a give time, the request needs to be re-directed to the primary node.
Primary node could be a cluster of nodes that are strongly consistent using Paxos.


### 2PC

#### Failure Scenarios
* Site not responding with vote - either ask again, or fail.
* Outcome not received - cohort keeps requesting the co-ordinator
* If the co-ordinator fails before outcome, feign ignorance and presume abort if the init log hasn't been writted to the log.
* After the outcome is arrived at, force a log-write.

#### Misc
* fsync -> Linux command to flush buffers to disk
