# Consistency - Part 2

## Paper 1 - Paxos
* Core concept - Synod algorithm
* Reference to the state machine approach for building a distributed system
* Core requirements of Consensus
	* The chosen value should be among the ones suggested.
	* Only one suggestion must be chosen.
	* The participants must know of the chosen value only after it's chosen.
* Agents in the consensus process: Proposers, acceptors and learners.
* The simplest way forward is to have a single acceptor, but it becomes a single point for failure for the entire system.
* Another idea is to have multiple acceptors, and a majority set of acceptors have their value chosen, given that an acceptor can accept at most one value.
	* P1 - Under the above assumption, one method is for an acceptor to accept the first proposal it receives.
	* But in this case, there could be a scenario with no clear majority, each acceptor might have a different value.
	* Even if there are only 2 different values, and it's split equally among the acceptors, failure of a single acceptor will prevent idenfication of what the value should be.
	* Hence, acceptors should be able to accept multiple proposals.
* To allow for multiple proposal acceptance, each proposal is assigned a natural number identifier.
* P2 - If a proposal with identifier 'n' is chosen and has value 'v', then every proposal chosen with idenfifier greater than 'n' should also have a value 'v'.
* P1 is still assumed here, but only for the first acceptor. All subsequent acceptors can accept only proposals with value 'v'.
* When proposing a value 'v' with a proposal identifier 'n', a proposor must 
	* Ask the acceptors, if they've accepted any proposals with identifier < n
	* If not, tell the acceptors not to accept any proposal identifier < n
	* Once it receives responses, if the acceptors have accepted a value already, they return the identifiers. Or they say that they've accepted no proposals.
		* If the acceptors return identifiers, the proposer must return the 'v' associated with the highest-values identifier.
		* If the acceptors say they've accepted no proposals, the the proposer chooses the value of 'n'
* If an acceptor receives a prepare request with identifier greater than a number it has already accepted, it ignores the request.

### State maintained
* Acceptors keep track of the highest-numbered proposal they have accepted and the highest-numbered prepare request they have responded to
* Proposers keep track of the highest-numbered proposal they have proposed

### Implementation
* In the actual implementation of Paxos, each of the processes play all the roles i.e. proposer, acceptor and learner
* Acceptors record their response (state) in stable memory before responding to prepare requests.
* The numbers proposed by the proposers are disjoint sets, and only issue numbers greater than what they've recorded to be the highest number previously proposed.
* Gaps in the operations are permitted in the case of failures.

## Raft
* A more applied approach to implementing a consensus algorithms
* Guarantees safety in all situations, availability in the case of a majority of the cluster being online
* Rather than using single-decree Paxos as the least commmon denominator, an operation is a log entry for Raft.
* Raft enforces a strong leadership policy, which mandates that a leader is the only instance that can decide the ordering of log entries.
* The roles are leader, follower and candidate.
* A candidate only exists during the period of an election.
* The leader is responsible for replicating the log order it determines to the followers.
* A leader informs it's followers of it's role as a leader using an AppendLog RPC
* Both leader election and log replication are done using RPCs.
* A leader periodically sends a heartbeat which is an AppendLog RPC with no logs contained, failure of which will prompt the followers to initiate a leader election, after incrementing it's current term.
* Each of the replicated systems has a copy of the current term of leadership, which is, for Raft, the defined clock, so to speak.
* The current term is exchanged whenever the servers communicate.
* When initiating an election, a candidate always increments a term.
